Vol. IX. The Glory of God is Intelligence. No. 10. 

IMPROVEMENT ERA 
Organ of Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations. 
PUBLISHED BY THE GENERAL BOARD.

Entered at the Post Office, Salt Lake City, Utah, as Second-Class Matter. 

AUGUST, 1906. 
---
VOYAGE OF THE SHIP "BROOKLYN." 

BY HON. JOHN M. HORNER. 


[When Elder A. Milton Musser, at whose request this account is written, ac- 
knowledged that he had received the letter containing these incidents in the voyage 
of the ship Brooklyn, the author, a veteran not unfamiliar to readers of the Era, 
wrote to Elder Musser, May 21, as follows. His words will serve as an introduction 
to the narrative : ' 'Before finishing this letter, yours in answer to mine of March and 
April was put in my hand, and I am pleased with, even grateful for, its contents. It 
fully answers, the questions requested. I feel to thank you sincerely for your 
worthy thought of urging me to write up the incidents of the ship Brooklyn 
voyage, etc., etc. The importance of that voyage to the world was growing in 
my mind all the time, and I was honestly of the opinion that it had been carefully 
and ably written until receiving your letter. There were certainly able penmen on 
board. I was a youngster, more accustomed to handling farm tools than the pen, 
and never dreamed of trying to write it up until receiving your letter. You cer- 
tainly are responsible for it. The incidents written are as bright in my mind now, 
as though they had happened last week. I am pleased to know you are satisfied 
with it. It is to be regretted that the important subject has not been treated by 
an abler pen." — Editors.] 

I. 

I am requested to name the moving cause that sent the ship 
Brooklyn, loaded with "Mormons," from New York to California, 
by way of Cape Horn, in 1846; what were the incidents by the way, 
and what has been the result. In answer: The ' 'Mormons" had 
been persecuted for their religion before their Church was organ- 
ized in 1830; and after that date, they were persecuted unto death 
by the sword and by affliction and suffering, brought upon them by 
being forced from their comfortable homes, into the frost and 
snow, without shelter and other comforts and protection. Men, 
women and children, the old and the afflicted, were all driven out. 

Their prophet, Joseph Smith, had told them they would be driven 
west and would ' 'become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky 
Mountains." 

After the prophet was massacred, and his mantle of leader- 
ship fell on the twelve apostles, with Brigham Young at their head, 
the outlook for peace being gloomy, the people decided to emigrate 
and seek peace in the West. With that idea in view, the Twelve 
counseled the eastern Saints to charter a ship, get on board, and 
go around Cape Horn to upper California, find a place to settle, 
farm and raise crops, so that when the Church pioneers should 
arrive there the following year they would find sustenance. 

This counsel was obeyed by the few eastern Saints taking the 
voyage, to the best of their ability. They chartered the ship 
Brooklyn, and 235 Saints — men, women and children, — and two 
other passengers — educated gentlemen — the captain, mates, sail- 
ors, stewards and cooks, altogether 252 souls, got on board, and in 
due time arrived in California. The Saints did the work assigned 
them before they left New York. 

The following year, 1847, the company sowed and harvested 
forty acres of wheat, and, in another place, sowed small lots of 
wheat, barley, peas etc., and started a garden with several class- 
es of garden seeds; but, being late in the season, and the grass- 
hoppers numerous, we got only experience from this venture. 
During the later part of the year, the company had made a selec- 
tion for a permanent settlement, and commenced work upon it, on 
the low, rich land near the river, intending to farm and build ex- 
tensively upon it the coming year, 1848. Unfortunately, the rains 
and melting snows from the mountains during the following win- 
ter and early spring sent a flood of water over tne land and obliter- 
ated all their labor. 'The gold mines being discovered about this 
time, by the "Mormon" battalion boys, threw the ship Brooklyn 
company into confusion. It was disorganized, the settlement was 
abandoned, and every member thereafter followed the counsel of 
his own will. 

We left New York, as above stated, with the promise of a 
prosperous voyage and the blessing of God to attend us. We re- 
ceived both with thanks. 

Our captain proved himself an able navigator. He hit every 
thing he aimed at. and nothing which he did not want to hit. He 
was a Baptist in religious profession; held religious services on deck 
weekly, which the Saints attended. His mates and sailors, in mor- 
als appeared above the average. Unbecoming language was sel- 
dom heard on board. For the character of our company we copy 
from the Friend, the report of Captain Richardson to that paper, 
after his five months' acquaintance with us, during our long voyage 
from New York to this place, which report we copy and endorse. 
The Friend announced our arrival at Honolulu on June 20 
1846, one hundred and thirty-six days from New York, which city 
we left on February 4, 1846. The paper further contains a six- 
column editorial on the history and doctrine of the Latter-day 
Saints, and continues: 

Before closing our remarks, we feel ourselves in duty bound to give publicity 
to the testimony of Captain Richardson, master of the ship Brooklyn, in regard to 
the general character of the emigrants, as it has been developed during a long 
voyage around Cape Horn. Of their general behavior and character he speaks in 
the most favorable manner. He says: "They have lived in peace together and 
uniformly appeared to be quiet and orderly. They are going with a full determi- 
nation of making a settlement, and have brought plows, carts, scythes, and all 
kinds of husbandry implements and tools for ship and house building. Many of 
the emigrants coming from New England and the Middle States are inclined to 
transplant some of the noble institutions of their native region. During most of 
the passage, they have maintained orderly and well conducted daily religious exer- 
cises which still continue while lying in port." During the passage there occurred 
ten deaths, four adults and six children, and two births; a male child born before 
doubling Cape Horn was called "Atlantic," and a female born this side was called 
"Pacific." 

Our religious exercises were kept up until we anchored in 
front of Yerba Buena, — now San Francisco. There has been no 
time since then when a "Mormon" Church did not exist in San 
Francisco. Now, active "Mormon" Churches are scattered over 
the state. Several of our company were elders. We were work- 
ing men and working women, school teachers, preachers, car- 
penters, blacksmiths, masons, printers, etc. The first paper ever 
published in San Francisco — The Alta California, was printed by 
the ship Brooklyn company. War was raging in California when 
we arrived there, between Mexico and the United States, and some 
of our company enlisted and wevjt down to the lower part of the 
territory with Colonol J. C. Fremont and helped finish up the war 
there. 

We left New York as above stated. Let me mention an inci- 
dent. As we approached the Gulf Stream, a severe storm burst 
upon us. It was so severe that the sails were all taken in, except 
a small one fhat rested against the shrouds of the main mast; no. 
one was safe on deck. The hatches were fastened down, except 
the one opening at the top of the steps leading down from the 
captain's cabin. The captain fearing his cabin would be swept off 
by the waves came down with a troubled countenance and an- 
nounced to the passengers: "I have done all I can to save the ship. 
If any of you have not made your peace with God, you would bet- 
ter do it now, as the ship may go down any minute. ' ' Through 
faith in their promise of a ''prosperous voyage," or through ignor- 
ance of their danger, none seemed alarmed but the captain. The 
storm passed without danger. Fortunately, it drove us on our 
journey. The captain, who was an old seafarer, was heard to say 
after the storm ceased, that it was the worst he had ever encoun- 
tered. 

We had a school on board for the children; and an ex- soldier, 
a brother who had spent years in the army, was required to drill 
the men of our company in the art of war during the fair weather, 
more for the benefit received from the exercise, than from any 
good we expected from learning the arts of war. 

It was fine weather when we doubled Cape Horn. The women 
were making bread, pies, cakes, frying doushnuts, etc., and the 
children were playing and romping about the deck. 

We were too far south to see the cape when we passed around 
it, in fact, we saw no land after leaving New York until we sighted 
the island of Juan Fernandez, where we stopped a few days replen- 
ishing our wood and water, catching, eating and salting fish. 
While coming up the coast of South America, a hint was given that 
the captain did not know where he was. The captain, hearing of 
this, immediately pointed his ship toward the mainland and stated: 
"If I am right, I will show you the highest points of the Andes, 
if this wind keeps up." Sure enough, we soon saw a small, black 
cloud arising out of the eastern horizon, which rapidly increased in 
height and length, and which, to us landsmen, looked like a thun- 
dercloud. By gazing through strong glasses, we saw the captain 
was right. He then again pointed his ship for the Hawaiian Is- 
lands, where we arrived as above stated. 

Soon after leaving Honolulu, on the 4th of July we had a 
spirited celebration of that day. Flags were hoisted, guns fired, 
patriotic songs were sung, etc. 

We encountered another storm coming up from the Horn, but 
it was not as severe as the one we had in the Atlantic- We had a 
three-days' calm as we approached California— one hundred miles 
or so out. Then a strong trade wind struck us and wafted us 
speedily and safely through the "Golden Gate," without a pilot, or 
halting, with all sails set, until we dropped anchor in front of 
Yerba Buena — now San Francisco— in the bay of San Francisco. 
We were all well, thankful and happy. We had truly a prosperous 
voyage, as we were promised before leaving New York. 

When I look back and contemplate the voyage of the ship 
Brooklyn Saints, the distance traveled, time consumed, and purpose 
of the journey, and the incidents thereof, I now feel to rank it credit- 
ably with that of the Jaredites and Nephites in their voyage across 
the Pacific to America, and with the voyage of the Mayflower pil- 
grims crossing the Atlantic from Europe to America. I am im- 
pressed further with the thought, that we were sent and protected 
by the Great Father, as were the pilgrims above mentioned, and to 
help forward a great work as did they. We performed the mis- 
sion assigned, as we then understood it, not comprehending its im- 
portance, as it now more clearly appears. We had no prophets 
with us to guide and direct us, as did the Jaredites and Nephites, 
but we felt thankful upon being able to congratulate ourselves 
that we were blessed with a more complete and continued unity in 
our company during the entire voyage than the Nephite emigrants 
enjoyed. Neither were we chastised by the Great Father, as was 
the Brother of Jared because he had ceased calling upon him. 

Although some of the Brooklyn Saints may have departed 
from the faith, yet I feel that the purpose for which they were 
sent was accomplished. 

Pauilo, Hawaii. 

(TO BE CONCLUDED IN SEPTEMBER NUMBER.-) 

Vol. IX. The Glory of God is Intelligence. NO. 11. 

IMPROVEMENT ERA. 
SEPTEMBER, 1906. 

VOYAGE OF THE SHIP "BROOKLYN." 

BY HON. JOHN M. HORNER. 


II. 

I have stated the object for which the ship Brooklyn Saints 
sailed from New York, so far as now and then we understood it; 
and briefly some of the incidents of the voyage, and as far as my 
memory serves me, after a lapse of nearly sixty years. We come 
now to the question, ''What has been some of the results?" We 
claim that the ship Brooklyn Saints were the first to introduce 
civilized agriculture into California. They were the first to intro- 
duce and use the modern mould-board plow; the first cradle for 
cutting grain; the first mowing machine, and the first reaping and 
thrashing machines ever used in California. Although we did not 
share the pleasure of feeding the Church pioneers who remained 
at Salt Lake, we did feed scores and thousands of gold hunters — 
who flocked to California by sea and land from all countries, in 
1849, and in after years — with potatoes, cabbages, tomatoes, 
onions, beets, turnips, and other vegetables, which were not with- 
in their reach, for love or money, only from the Brooklyn passen- 
gers, during the four years following 1848. There were no others 
in the farming business to effect anything, until after those dates. 

It may also be claimed that the Brooklyn Saints proved to be 
in the van of the Pacific missionaries, and they did for a time 
slightly assist them in going and returning. 

Of course, we claim also that their coming to California had 
something to do with the discovery of gold, and with starting up the 
settlement of the territory of California to be the noted state it 
now is. Only for the discovery of gold, there is no assurance 
that California would be now more than a territory. 


VO YA GE OF THE SHIP "BROOKL YN." 891 

The discovery of gold in California in 1848 was without a 
doubt work directed of the Great Father, and he used so many 
instruments to effect it that no one person can claim to be the 
whole cause. 

Even the ''Mormon" Church can scarcely claim it; since, if 
the Church had not been driven out of civilization, a long time 
must have slipped away before it could have reached Utah. No 
ship Brooklyn emigrants would have been sent to farm in Cali- 
fornia, then a Mexican territory, and it is doubtful if the "Mor- 
mon" Battalion would have been enlisted. These are only the 
fruits of my fertile imagination. The facts are, the Church was 
driven out. The Battalion boys were enlisted. The Brooklyn emi- 
grants were sent to California to farm, gold was discovered, Cali- 
fornia was raised to a prosperous state by agriculture, and mine 
production, from various discoveries in its territory. 

Surely the people of the Church were chosen and made the 
honored instruments by the Great I Am to discover gold in Cali- 
fornia and to commence the greater blessing to man that came 
by reclaiming the deserts and making them fruitful and habitable. 
President Brigham Young and his counselors were the principal 
instruments chosen by the Great One to council, guide and lead 
his Church. Brigham began by sending the Brooklyn Saints to 
California. He counseled, encouraged, and assisted in the enlist- 
ing of the "Mormon" Battalion boys, who were sent to California, 
where they arrived in good time. 

Brigham gave direction to Mr. Samuel Brannan, the leader of the 
Brooklyn Saints, before he left New York, to go east from Cali- 
fornia, in the spring of 1847, on the overland trail, until he 
should meet the Church pioneers. He did so, and met them near 
Salt Lake, with Brigham Young at their head. Brannan reported 
that he had filled the mission given him by President Young in 
New York. He had taken the Brooklyn emigrants to California* 
and came overland and met the Church pioneers as directed, with 
President Young leading. The President gave him a message to de- 
liver to the Battalion boys, when he should meet them on his return 
to California, to the effect that none must come to headquarters if 
he did not have enough provisions to last a certain number of 
months, or words to that effect. The message was delivered. 

The boys halted. A part went on, and a part returned to re- 
cruit their larders. This obedience to the President's direction 
led to the first discovery of gold in California, and to promptly ad- 
vancing its territory to the great state we now behold it. 

President Young, leading the Church into the wilderness, as 
he was guided and directed by the Great One, proved to be the 
first Church leader of any sect who ever led or taught the people 
to redeem the desert and make it blossom as the rose, and to yield 
wealth for sustaining both man and beast. 

Truth points to the fact that the "Mormon" Church, with 
Brigham Young at its head, was the instrument used by the Great 
One to discover gold to the world in California in 1848. This led 
to others; in fact, the whole world has awakened to a hunt for 
gold, silver, and other metals, and much has been discovered. 

President Young sent out the "Mormon" emigrants around 
Cape Horn, and the Battalion boys across the country to Cali- 
fornia, in 1846, and gave them directions what to do after their 
arrival. It was the obeying of those directions that caused dis- 
covery of gold in 1848. 

- President Young led the Church pioneers to eastern California 
— now Utah — in 1847. He led and directed it many years, as he 
was guided by the Great Father, and succeeded in convincing the 
people of our country and their government that the great Ameri- 
can desert could be reclaimed and made a suitable country for 
man to dwell in, and the government has now enacted the irriga- 
tion law to assist in its redemption. 

President Roosevelt, while speaking upon the subject in the 
"Mormon" Tabernacle, in Salt Lake City, said, "But for you, the 
irrigation law could not have been enacted." 

This no doubt referred to the ' 'Mormon" people, as it was well 
known they had built the dams, dug the ditches, done the irrigat- 
ing; planted, cultivated, gathered the crops, made improvements, 
and made the country prosperous for years, without assistance or 
sympathy from the outside. So it seems that the people of these 
states should thank the Great Father for sending the "Mormons" 
to discover the gold, and to redeem the deserts, which has made 
this country so much more prosperous :than was possible without 
these discoveries and improvements; and for these great blessings 
the diligent "Mormons" should be commended and encouraged to 
go ahead — as Canada and Mexico have encouraged them — and 
build up the waste places, make the desert fruitful, improve the 
country, make other valuable discoveries, etc., that peace on 
earth and good will to man may prevail. 
Pauilo, Hawaii 

(the end.) 

