
National  Finance  and  Public  Money 


Settling  tie  Money  Question 


overnment  Ownership  of  Railroads  and  Telegraphs 

BY 

J.  M.  HORNER 

AND 

PERSONAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


HONOLULU,  H.  I. 
HAWAIIAN  GAZETTE  Co.  PRINT 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1898,  by  J.  M.  HORNER 
In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington,  D.  C. 




THE   AUTHOR  AT  76  YEARS  OF  AGE. 




THE   AUTHOR  AT  31  YEARS  OF  AGE. 


PREFACE  TO  PERSONAL  HISTORY. 


The  following  item  was  part  of  the  testimony  given  by  a  young 
Hawaiian,  who  had  been  sent  abroad,  educated  and  brought 
back  at  the  expense  of  the  Government,  which  he  had  joined, 
with  a  party,  to  destroy,  when  being  tried  for  his  treasonable 
act  stated  under  oath,  "I  was  sent  abroad,  educated,  returned  and 
set  down  on  the  streets  of  Honolulu  a  pauper." 

After  reading  the  above  testimony,  I  felt  sad,  as  I  could 
realize  the  hopeless  out-look,  the  heart-sinking  of  a  man  thus 
viewing  himself  in  his  youth,  being  possessed  at  the  same  time 
with  the  wealth  of  youth,  health,  strength  and  education,  those 
particular  qualifications  that  should,  if  coupled  with  energy  and 
honesty,  make  a  man  more  valuable  to  his  country  than  his  phy- 
sical weight  in  gold. 

There  was  plenty  of  work,  but  he  did  not  want  work  at  the 
salary  offered  and  hoped  to  do  better  by  overturning  the  Gov- 
ernment. 

No  doubt  as  Horace  Greeley  said,  "The  darkest  hour  in  the 
history  of  any  young  man  is  when  he  sits  down  to  study  how  to 
get  money  without  honestly  earning  it,"  which  appeared  to  be 
this  young  man's  situation. 

I  thought  when  reading  the  above  testimony  of  trying  to 
counteract  this  feeling  of  hopeless  despondency  in  some  young 
men,  by  pointing  to  the  acts  of  some  noted  Americans  and 
other  foreigners,  who  arose  to  distinction,  and  who  were  no  bet- 
ter endowed  when  starting  in  life's  battle  than  this  young  man 
confesses  himself  to  have  been ;  but  never  as  yet  having  tried  to 
counteract  such  hopeless  despondency,  I  will  now  attempt  it  in 
the  way  indicated ;  but  as  few  can  ever  expect  to  reach  the  pinacle 
of  fame  as  statesmen,  that  Gladstone,  Webster,  Lincoln  and  others 
of  that  class  have  reached,  or  the  eminence  that  Napoleon,  Grant, 
Sherman  and  others  attained  as  soldiers,  or  as  Astor,  Roth- 
childs,  Vanderbilt,  Gould  and  others  attained  as  money  getters. 
As  it  seems  unwise  to  point  to  such  as  these  for  young  men 


248 

to  pattern  after,  as  it  required  opportunities  as  well  as  sterling- 
qualities  to  raise  men  to  such  eminence,  I  conclude  to  refer 
to  another  and  more  numerous  class  of  successful  men  who 
raised  themselves  by  shear  force  of  brain,  brawn  and  honest 
industry  from  poverty  to  wealth  and  influence.  To  this,  almost 
any  ordinary  American  boy  with  health  and  industry  may  attain 
by  pursuing  a  studious,  diligent,  honest  and  straightforward 
course.  In  looking  around  for  an  example  to  point  to  and  not 
being  satisfied  as  to  whom  to  refer  to  by  name,  although  I  knew 
many,  one  suggested  "take  yourself  you  know  more  about  him 
than  any  one  else."  So  after  some  reflection  I  said  "all  right," 
so  I  pen  this. 

THE  STRUGGLES  AND  TRIUMPHS  OF  A  BUSY  LIFE. 

I  was  born  on  a  New  Jersey  farm  in  Monmouth  County, 
June  1 5th,  1821,  where  I  continued  to  live  until  the  end  of  my 
2 ist  year,  when  I  was  expected  to  shift  for  myself  without 
money  and.  with  but  little  business  experience.  I  had  good 
health,  was  industrious  and  ambitious,  which  impelled  me  to 
strive  to  be  the  best  workman  on  the  farm,  to  run  faster,  jump 
further,  be  the  best  ball-player,  and  always  strove  to  be  at  the 
head  of  my  class  at  school,  (did  not  always  succeed,  but  was 
awarded  a  premium  by  my  teacher  for  "trying  harder  to  learn 
than  any  scholar  in  school"). 

My  star  of  hope  arose  early  and  promised  me  many  things 
and  time  to  acquire  them.  My  early  hopes  have  been  more 
than  realized,  I  never  thought  myself  a  pauper,  but  fully  realized 
that  I  must  rely  upon  myself  and  the  "Great  Father"  for  success, 
that  I  must  take  my  chances  among  thirty  million  others,  and 
await  my  opportunity. 

Industry,  honesty  and  good  judgment  was  to  be  my  guide 
star,  for  success.  I  found  them  always  in  demand  wherever  I 
went,  as  I  had  never  thought  of  success  coming  to  me  from 
any  other  source,  it  never  did.  After  becoming  my  own  boss, 
which  all  young  men  were  supposed  to  be  in  New  Jersey  at  the 
age  of  21,  and  looking  around  and  nothing  better  presenting 
itself,  I  hired  to  a  farmer  to  work  during  the  summer  and  fall, 
for  nine  dollars  per  month  and  board  and  washing.  In  the  win- 
ter I  taught  a  district  school.  Thus  passed  my  twenty-second 


249 

year,  as  happy  a  year  as  has  ever  fallen  to  my  lot  to  enjoy.  I 
was  just  as  content  working  for  thirty-five  cents  per  day,  as  I 
was  in  after  years,  when  my  time  for  overseeing  my  business 
netted  me  thirty  dollars  per  day,  or  when  my  net  income  ex- 
ceeded thirty  thousand  dollars  per  year. 

Not  seeing  in  New  Jersey  such  opportunities  as  my  heart 
craved,  I  went  west  prospecting  in  the  spring  of  my  twenty-third 
year,  as  far  as  Iowa,  on  the  Mississippi  river,  returned  in  the  fall 
and  taught  school  again  in  the  winter,  went  west  again  the  fol- 
lowing spring,  returned  early  and  again  taught  school.  Nothing 
in  the  west  seemed  to  suit,  plenty  of  land,  corn  worth  from  seven 
to  ten  cents  per  bushel,  a  full  grown  ox,  ten  dollars,  and  other 
things  there  produced  proportionally  cheap. 

Many  of  the  travelers  and  people  living  along  the  river,  were 
shaking  with  the  ague,  farmer's  living  on  bacon  and  "corn 
dodgers;"  no  flouring  mill  within  forty  miles  of  where  I  stopped 
in  Illinois  and  Iowa,  no  money  except  what  was  left  by  travelers 
and  immigrants,  this  soon  left,  being  sent  East  by  merchants 
to  pay  for  supplies,  business  was  mostly  done  by  barter. 

So  having  no  inclination  to  settle  there  I  returned  East 
as  before  stated,  and  in  January,  1846,  I  married  a  neighbor's 
daughter,  she  is  yet  with  me  hale  and  hearty,  daily  superintend- 
ing her  household,  her  flowers,  shrubs  and  lawn,  and  has  proved 
a  worthy  help-meet  for  a  pioneer,  and  now  being  surrounded 
by  husband,  children  and  grandchildren,  she  seems  to  enjoy  life. 
We  left  my  father's  house  next  morning  after  marriage  on  what  I 
may  be  permitted  to  call  our  wedding  tour,  for  California,  by 
the  way  of  New  York,  Cape  Horn,  Juan  Fernandez  Island  and 
the  Sandwich  Islands,  having  previously  engaged  passage  on  an 
emigrant  ship,  bound  for  that  far  off  and  almost  unknown  re- 
gion, where  we  arrived  in  about  six  months,  which,  with  the 
eighteen  thousand  miles  traveled,  renders  this  both  in  time  and 
distance  a  rather  uncommon  wedding  tour. 

Our  journey  was  rather  prosperous  and  upon  the  Whole 
pleasant,  although  we  encountered  a  severe  storm,  as  we  ap- 
proached the  Gulf  stream,  another  in  the  latitude  of  Chili  in  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  and  a  three  days'  calm  as  we  approached  Califor- 
nia in  July. 

War  was  raging  in  California  when  we  arrived  there  between 
Mexico  and  the  United  States.  The  upper  part  of  the  territory 


17 


250 

was  already  in  possession  of  the  United  States  forces,  which  we 
were  pleased  to  hear,  and  the  lower  part  soon  followed.  Some 
of  our  company  volunteered  and  went  down  with  Col.  Fremont, 
to  help  finish  up  the  work,  all  of  the  male  members  of  our  com- 
pany took  turns  standing  guard  for  about  one  month  in  what  is 
now  San  Francisco. 

The  number  of  inhabitants  of  Yerba  Buena  (now  San  Fran- 
cisco) when  we  arrived  there,  was  said  to  be  forty,  our  company  of 
168  persons  made  an  addition  to  their  number  of  about  400  per 
cent. 

After  this  digression,  I  will  proceed.  A  small  unproductive 
village  like  Yerba  Buena,  was  no  -place  for  an  ambitious  farmer, 
and  as  farming  was  my  profession  and  I  had  brought  some 
farming  tools  with  me,  I  was  anxious  to  get  to  work.  So 
after  about  thirty  days,  James  Light  and  myself  with  our  families 
left  the  town  to  fill  a  contract  we  had  made  with  Dr.  John  Marsh, 
to  put  in  a  crop  of  wheat  on  shares,  on  his  ranch  situated  on  the 
lower  San  Joaquin.  We  succeeded  in  getting  in  some  40  acres, 
which  grew  finely,  as  the  land  was  good,  and  the  rains  were  early 
and  abundant  that  year.  We  used  one  span  of  oxen  at  a  time, 
Mr.  Light  led  them  by  a  rope,  while  walking,  at  the  same  time 
scattered  the  seed  wheat  in  the  bottom  of  the  last  furrow,  I  held 
the  plow  and  urged  forward  the  team.  The  grain  was  covered 
about  four  inches  deep. 

There  being  no  further  service  for  us  at  the  Doctor's  after  the 
wheat  was  sown,  Mr.  Light  returned  to  town  and  in  March  1847 
I  moved  over  to  the  Mission  de  San  Jose,  about  thirty  miles  dis- 
tant, where  I  found  farming  prospects  more  favorable,  and  in  its 
vicinity  my  large  farming  operations  were  afterwards  prosecuted. 
Upon  my  arrival  at  the  Mission  I  plowed  in  the  Mission  field 
and  elsewhere,  planted  and  sowed  wheat,  barley,  peas,  potatoes 
and  made  a  nice  garden  planted  with  different  kinds  of  truck. 
All  of  this  sowing  and  planting  was  destroyed  by  grasshoppers, 
an  affliction  from  which  I  never  after  suffered,  although  I  farmed 
in  that  neighborhood  thirty  odd  years.  Later  in  the  season  I 
planted  some  late  potatoes,  they  grew  nicely;  but  before  they 
matured,  they  were  destroyed  by  cattle. 

The  wheat  sown  at  the  Doctor's  was  harvested  and  stored  in 
his  granary,  but  when  we  called  for  our  share  the  Doctor  gravely 
informed  us:  "You  have  no  wheat  here,  your  share  was  de- 


251 

stroyed  by  elk,  antelope  and  other  wild  animals,  my  share  alone 
was  harvested."  So  we  got  nothing  for  our  labor.  Thus  ended 
my  first  year's  farming  in  California.  Although  I  got  no  dollars 
out  of  it,  I  did  get  experience,  which  I  profited  by  in  after  years. 
I  had  tested  the  soil  in  different  places  with  several  different 
kinds  of  farm  products,  and  learned  the  most  suitable  seasons 
for  sowing  and  planting. 

I  supported  myself  from  the  proceeds  of  a  small  dairy,  which  I 
worked  on  shares  for  the  owner,  and  from  the  labor  I  performed 
for  others. 

Nearby  I  rented  a  piece  of  land  from  an  Indian,  and  built  a 
small  house  upon  it  and  moved  into  it  in  the  Spring  of  1848,  with 
a  determination  of  making  another  farming  venture  that  year. 

There  being  no  fences  or  fence  material  for  miles,  I  went  to 
the  Redwoods  twenty-five  miles  distant,  for  fence  material,  I 
made  a  pen  to  hold  animals,  fenced  a  small  garden  plot  and 
sowed  it  with  various  kinds  of  garden  seed,  intending  to  trans- 
plant them  into  the  open  ground  later  on,  but  human  plans  not 
being  infallible,  the  plants  were  never  transplanted,  for  the  rea- 
son, that  gold  was  discovered  about  this  time,  and,  taking  the 
gold  fever,  which  broke  out  with  epidemic  violence,  and  took 
nearly  all  the  people  (ourselves  included)  off  to  the  mines.  We 
did  not  get  much  gold,  but  we  got  the  argue  without  much 
exertion,  and  did  considerable  shaking.  The  gold  fever  having 
left  us  entirely,  we  returned  home  in  the  fall  and  in  the  healthy 
coast  climate,  the  argue  soon  left  us.  We  were  a  happy  couple 
when  we  got  back  to  the  farm,  although  our  garden  was  de- 
stroyed, our  hogs  had  gone  wild,  our  house  was  only  walls,  roof 
and  outer  and  inner  doors  made  of  rough  slabs,  hung  with  raw 
hide  hinges,  our  windows  were  muslin  and  we  had  "ground  for 
the  floor;"  but  it  was  our  mansion,  we  enjoyed  and  improved  it 
as  time  rolled  on. 

There  were  two  rooms  in  the  house  and  a  chimney  went  up 
from  the  division  wall  which  accommodated  a  fire  place  in  each 
room. 

One  dark,  blustry,  rainy  night  a  company  of  Indians  (bucks 
and  squaws)  had  got  caught  from  home  in  the  storm,  and 
knocked  at  our  door  for  shelter,  we  welcomed  them  in,  and  let 
them  occupy  the  outer  room  during  the  night. 

No,  we  did  not  fear  them  more  than  we  should  so  many  chil- 


252 

dren,  we  knew  only  one  or  two  of  them,  but  that  with  the  happy 
indications  of  the  rest  of  the  company,  on  admittance  convinced 
us,  all  was  well.  We  closed,  but  did  not  fasten  the  door  between 
us. 

During  the  night  an  ox  with  long  wide  spreading  horns,  with 
others  of  his  race,  was  getting  what  comfort  they  could  by  shel- 
tering themselves  on  the  lee  side  of  our  house,  there  being  no 
trees,  no  rocks,  no  fences  or  anything  else  behind  which  they 
could  get  for  shelter;  but  this  particular  ox  not  being  able  to 
get  close  enough  to  the  wall  on  account  of  his  long  horns,  stood 
with  the  side  of  his  head  at  the  window,  and  by  slipping  his 
horn  through  between  the  wall  of  the  house  and  the  muslin 
window  into  the  house  a  foot  or  two,  he  could  then  stand  close 
to  the  wall  and  thus  be  better  sheltered.  We  could  not  see  him 
nor  he  us,  but  we  gently  felt  of  his  horn;  and  did  not  molest 
him,  as  we  were  pleased  to  know,  that  even  dumb  animals  as 
well  as  Indians  could  get  comfort  from  our  surroundings. 

We  had  had  our  experiences  in  the  mines  and  had  bid  them 
farewell  forever,  fully  determined,  if  we  could  not  die  without 
going  to  the  mines  to  do  it,  we  would  not  die  at  all. 

Our  first  born  was  now  about  one  year  old.  Thus  ended  our 
second  year's  experience  in  California,  and  with  but  small  ac- 
cumulations. 

My  mind  of  course  turned  to  the  farm,  farming  was  my  pro- 
fession. I  had  a  good  piece  of  land,  was  living  on  it,  and  my  ex- 
perience gave  me  confidence  in  the  soil  and,  as  if  the  fates  had 
decreed  it,  farm  I  must,  and  farm  I  did.  My  farm  had  no  wood 
or  timber  upon  it,  fencing  could  only  be  obtained  at  the  Red- 
woods, twenty-five  miles  distant.  My  1847  experience  had  taught 
me  that  no  success  could  be  attained  without  fencing  the  land, 
as  cattle  and  horses  existed  on  the  plains  by  thousands  and  on 
account  of  the  water  and  green  feed  on  and  around  my  farm, 
made  it  their  stamping  ground,  in  the  fall  of  the  year.  So  I  pre- 
pared seed  with  a  determination  of  fencing,  and  farming  all  I 
could  fence  during  the  planting  season  of  1849,  and  on  the  loth 
of  March,  I  started  for  the  Redwoods  to  make  rails  and  posts 
for  my  intended  fence;  taking  with  me  three  Indians  (the  best 
help  I  could  get),  four  yoke  of  oxen,  our  tools  and  one  wagon. 
Night  overtook  us  about  ten  miles  from  our  destination,  where 
we  camped,  and  during  the  night  an  unusual  and  unexpected 


253 

snow  fell  completely  covering  the  ground  from  the  bay  shore  to 
the  top  of  the  mountains. 

The  grass  being  completely  hidden  by  the  snow,  from  the 
horses  and  cattle,  the  latter  came  out  of  the  hills,  walked  around 
through  the  valley  bellowing  and  seeking  food,  but  fortunately 
in  two  days  the  grass  began  to  show  on  the  plain,  and  in  a  few 
days  longer,  all  was  right  again  in  the  hills  where  we  had  to 
work.  We  kept  ahead  and  reached  camp  in  the  woods  before 
the  next  night.  We  worked  some  three  or  four  days,  preparing 
fence  material,  loaded  up  and  reached  home  within  the  week. 
The  Indians  suffered  some  working  in  the  snow,  with  bare  feet, 
fortunately  the  sun  came  out  bright  and  warmed  the  bare  logs, 
posts  and  rails;  the  Indians  would  work  a  while  in  the  snow, 
then  step  quickly  upon  some  stick  to  warm  their  feet.  We  con- 
tinued making  trips  to  the  woods  at  short  intervals  for  fence 
material  until  the  latter  part  of  summer,  when  we  erected  our 
material  into  a  fence.  Meanwhile,  we  had  plowed,  planted  and 
cared  for  our  young  crop. 

Thus  we  fenced  and  planted  about  sixteen  acres.  Potatoes 
was  our  principal  crop,  we  had  also  onions,  turnips,  cabbages, 
watermelons  and  muskmelons.  The  crop  grew  well,  one  part 
of  the  fence  was  weak,  and  in  the  fall,  the  only  green  feed  in 
the  neighborhood,  was  within  my  fence,  which  proved  an  almost 
irresistible  temptation  to  the  hungry  cattle,  and  that  fact  was  a 
source  of  many  anxious  fears  on  my  part,  lest  my  promising 
crop  should  be  destroyed  by  them,  and  I  have  to  struggle  on 
another  year  before  I  should  make  a  success  of  my  farming 
venture. 

The  cattle  having  broken  into  the  field  a  few  times  aroused 
my  combativeness  to  such  a  pitch,  as  to  cause  me  to  abandon 
my  bed  in  the  house,  and  with  blankets  and  gun,  spend  my 
nights  in  my  field,  by  that  means,  I  guarded  and  saved  .my  crop. 
I  did  not  injure  the  cattle,  only  aimed  to  scare  them  by  the  re- 
port of  the  gun,  and  sting  the  worst  of  them  with  small  shot. 
I  kept  up  this  watchfulness,  until  rains  came  late  in  the  fall,  and 
started  up  green  feed,  after  which  the  stock  scattered  and  an- 
noyed me  no  more  that  year. 

My  first  realization  from  my  three  years'  farming  venture, 
was  two  dollars  paid  me  for  watermelons  in  September  of  this 
year.  Fortunately  October  and  November  brought  to  California 


254 

a  large  number  of  gold  hunters,  coming  both  by  sea  and  land; 
nothing  seemed  to  be  craved  by  the  appetites  of  these  people, 
so  much  as  vegetables,  many  of  them  had,  or  were  rapidly  ap- 
proaching the  scurvy.  They  would  eat  a  raw  onion  or  potatoe 
with  as  great,  and  apparent  relish,  as  though  it  was  a  nice  flavor- 
ed apple.  The  result,  as  I  was  the  only  farmer  in  the  territory 
that  had  vegetables  for  sale,  I  was  much  sought  after  by  cus- 
tomers from  all  sides,  two  wagons  came  to  the  farm  several 
times,  from  the  mines,  two  hundred  miles  distant  and  bought 
loads  of  vegetables  from  me,  at  fair  prices. 

This  crop  proved  to  be  worth  about  eight  thousand  dollars; 
but  as  an  early  heavy  rain  sent  a  flood  of  water  over  my  field, 
from  a  brook  near  by,  and  continued  so  long,  that  nearly  one-half 
of  my  potatoes  were  destroyed  before  I  could  secure  them,  help 
being  scarce.  However,  what  I  did  gather  was  a  partial  com- 
pensation for  my  long  struggle,  besides  my  success  was  gratify- 
ing and  I  put  it  down  on  the  credit  side  of  my  ledger,  as  a  further 
sum.  Thus  ended  my  farming  venture  of  1849.  ^n  the  beginning 
of  January,  1850,  my  brother  William  came  to  me  by  the  way 
of  Panama,  arriving  after  a  long  and  perilous  journey.  He 
went  from  New  York  to  the  isthmus  in. a  steamer,  from  the 
isthmus  to  Acapulco  in  a  sailing  vessel,  and  from  there  to  San 
Francisco  in  a  steamer,  consuming  six  months'  time  on  the 
journey.  By  the  blessing  of  heaven  he  escaped  the  cholera  on 
the  isthmus,  while  his  shipmates  died  by  dozens.  And  he  escap- 
ed starvation  and  perhaps  a  violent  death  by  a  fair  wind  spring- 
ing up  and  wafting  them  safely  into  Acapulco,  at  the  critical 
moment  when  the  ship's  company  were  about  to  turn  cannibals 
and  cast  lots  to  decide  who  should  be  first  eaten.  My  brother 
afterwards  heard,  that  as  he  was  more  fleshy  then  others  of  the 
company,  they  were  going  to  make  the  lot  fall  on  him. 

My  brother  had  also  been  bred  to  the  farm,  and  was  young 
(about  21)  ambitious  and  very  industrious.  I  received  him  as 
partner  in  my  business,  we  worked  and  flourished  together  the 
next  four  years,  perhaps  as  no  other  farmers  ever  flourished 
before  in  America,  in  so  short  a  time.  My  experience,  my  loca- 
tion, my  established  business,  our  skill  and  industry,  together 
with  the  property  I  had  acquired,  all  became  capital  in  our 
hands,  and  we  worked  them  to  the  utmost  of  our  ability,  know- 


255 

ing  we  were  almost  the  only  farmers  in  the  territory  that  year, 
there  would  be  sale  for  all  we  could  raise. 

Fortune  is  said  to  knock  at  least  once  at  every  man's  door. 
We  looked  upon  this  time  an  opportunity,  as  fortunes  knocking 
at  our  door,  she  found  us  at  home,  we  opened  the  door  and  bid 
her  welcome,  and  thankfully  accepted  her  offer.  We  extended 
our  fence,  inclosing  about  500  acres,  we  farmed  what  we  could, 
and  let  out  to  two  tenants  a  part  of  our  land  to  be  worked  on 
shares,  we  supplying  the  teams,  tools  and  seed.  Our  crop  this 
year  was  comparatively  large,  and  the  soil  being  virgin,  the 
product  was  of  good  quality,  we  bought  out  our  two  tenants  at 
harvest  time,  paying  them  near  twenty  thousand  dollars  each  for 
their  share  of  the  crops  they  had  raised.  Our  gr.oss  sales  this 
year  approximated  $150,000,  our  onions  sold  for  forty  dollars 
per  cental,  tomatoes  three  hundred  dollars  per  ton,  potatoes  one 
hundred  and  fifty  dollars  per  ton,  and  other  things  in  proportion. 
This  crop  was  not  raised  and  cared  for  on  flowery  beds  of  ease; 
help  was  scarce,  until  harvest  time,  the  fencing  had  to  be  ob- 
tained at  great  expense  and  labor,  in  proportion,  the  same  as  in 
1849,  and  as  it  was  that  year,  so  it  was  this,  some  part  of  the 
fence  was  weak,  and  had  to  be  guarded,  myself  and  brother  done 
the  guarding. 

Help  getting  plenty  in  the  fall,  this  crop  was  gathered  without 
loss.  We  established  a  commission  house  in  San  Francisco  un- 
der the  firm  name  of  J.  M.  Horner  &  Co.,  for  selling  our  own 
and  others  produce:  which  served  us  a  good  purpose  in  this  and 
other  vears.  Thus  ended  our  farming  venture  of  1850,  we 
bought  this  year  one  hundred  acres  of  land  at-  the  landing  on 
the  Alameda  river  and  laid  out  the  town  of  Union  City  upon  it. 
An  historical  fact,  I  mav  be  permitted  to  mention  here.  Some- 
times after  the  mines  opened  in  California,  people  were  so  taken 
with  the  mines  and  merchandising,  that  agriculture  attracted  but 
little  attention ;  which  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  as  so  many  re- 
ports had  gone  out  to  the  world  that  "California  was  hopelessly 
barren,  purely  a  mining  country."  Besides  reports  had  also 
gone  forth  of  large  and  sure  profit  made  by  mining,  and  large 
fortunes  by  merchandising,  besides  the  overland  immigrants 
arriving  in  California  at  the  close  of  the  dry  season,  could  hardly 
be  blamed  for  considering  the  country  barren  as  everything  was 
then  dry,  and  certainly  looked  barren.  Those  arriving  by  sea. 


landing  at  San  Francisco,  going  up  the  Sacramento  river  and 
crossing  the  uncultivated  plain  between  the  river  and  the  mines, 
and  returning  by  the  same  route  where  no  farming  or  gardening 
was  to  be  seen.  No  wonder  California's  barrenness  was  reported 
by  these.  So  extensive  did  the  idea  of  barrenness  spread ;  that  a 
company  was  formed  in  New  York,  to  run  a  steamship  line  be- 
tween San  Francisco  and  the  Sandwich  Islands  for  the  express 
purpose  of  supplying  California  with  vegetables,  they  sent  out  a 
Captain  Brown  to  look  for  a  suitable  place  somewhere  around 
the  bay  of  San  Francisco  to  construct  their  landings  and  depots. 
On  his  inspection  tour  around  the  bay  he  stopped  at  my  farm, 
looked  at  the  crops,  then  about  ready  for  marketing,  he  also  saw 
the  Agricultural  Fair  held  that  year.  He  returned  to  New  York 
and  reported 'to  his  company;  but  I  heard  no  more  about  the 
steamship  company  that  was  to  supply  the  people  of  California 
with  vegetables. 

In  about  three  years  from  that  time,  California  supplied  not 
only  her  own  vegetable  wants;  but  all  required  for  export  and 
for  ships,  besides  millions  of  pounds  perished  on  the  farms  and 
in  warehouses,  no  market  for  them.  Since  that  year,  general 
farming  in  California  has  not  been  very  remunerative,  as  its 
resources  were  great  and  markets  too  far  away. 

So  thoroughly  was  the  barrenness  of  California  soils  believed 
abroad,  that  a  gentleman  who  had  seen  a  report  in  the  Eastern 
papers  of  my  1850  crop,  was  fully  convinced  that  I  had  the  only 
piece  of  fertile  soil  in  the  State,  without  it  might  be  a  few  acres 
just  on  the  outside  of  my  fence,  he  thought  if  he  could  reach  my 
place  before  anyone  else  thought  of  it,  he  possibly  could  secure 
it.  He  came  overland,  drove  direct  to  my  house,  did  not  stop  at 
the  mines,  although  he  passed  them  two  hundred  miles  back.  So 
bent  was  he  in  reaching  my  place  and  at  once  secure  the  few 
imaginary  fruitful  acres  close  to  and  on  the  outside  of  my  fence. 
He  came  with  team  and  prepared  to  farm.  After  looking  around 
over  the  many  thousands  fruitful  acres  in  Santa  Clara  Valley, 
he  concluded  not  to  farm,  I  bought  his  team,  he  left,  and  I  saw 
him  no  more. 

We  made  extensive  preparations  for  increasing  our  business 
in  1851.  We  bought  some  excellent  farming  land  near  Union 
City,  fenced,  built  on  and  farmed  it  in  addition  to  our  home 
farm.  We  bought  teams  (horses,  mules  and  oxen  that  had  cross- 


257 

ed  the  plains),  imported  agricultural  implements  from  the  East- 
ern States,  iron  fence  and  wire  for  fencing  from  England.  By 
so  doing  miles  of  fencing  was  quickly,  but  not  cheaply  construct- 
ed; as  each  mile  cost  us  over  one  thousand  dollars.  This  year 
our  crops  were  large  and  a  ready  market  was  found  for  all  we 
raised,  though  at  reduced  prices  from  former  years,  as  other 
farmers  had  got  to  work  in  different  parts  of  the  State,  and  thus 
the  market  was  better  supplied.  We  bought  a  steamboat  (The 
Union)  to  carry  our  produce  to  market.  This  year  our  gross 
sales  approximated  t\vo  hundred  and  seventy  thousand  dollars. 
During  the  fall  of  this  year,  Professor  Shelton,  botanist  held  in 
San  Francisco  the  first  Agricultural  Fair  ever  held  in  California, 
to  which  I  was  the  largest  contributor,  and  some  months  after  I 
received  the  following  letter  and  a  silver  goblet  (the  largest  pre- 
mium) from  the  Professor. 

John  M.  Horner,  Esquire.  Although  you  were  recently  pre- 
sented with  the  accompanying  testimonial  of  the  public  appre- 
ciation of  your  efforts  to  develop  the  agricultural  resources  of 
California.  Yet  I  cannot  refrain  from  adding  my  individual 
congratulations  to  those  so  universally  accorded  by  our  fellow 
citizens,  if  it  be  but  to  assure  you  that  I  heartly  participate  in 
them  and  fully  recognize  your  right  to  the  title  of  pioneer  in  this 
branch  of  public  industry.  Sir,  it  is  true  that  the  premium  was 
not  awarded  by  me  personally  nor  by  those  who  could  be  in- 
fluenced by  any  preferences  I  may  have  indicated.  But  I  have 
the  consciousness  of  knowing  that  Messrs.  Fremont,  King, 
Snydcr  and  Saunders  whose  pleasing  duty  it  was  to  select  the 
most  worthy  of  the  candidates  for  the  honor,  did  nothing  more 
than  echo  the  public  voice  in  presenting  you  with  this  goblet. 

Take  it  then  sir,  no  less  as  the  evidence  of  the  public  esteem, 
than  as  proof  of  my  individual  regard,  keep  it,  as  a  memento  of 
successful  enterprise  and  as  a  pledge  of  private  friendship,  and 
believe  that  no  member  of  your  family,  however  remote  may  be 
his  generation  from  our  own  but  will  recognize  it  as  an  honorable 
token  of  the  worth  of  his  ancestor  with  more  pride  and  pleasure. 
Sir,  very  truly, 

Your  friend  and  obedient  servent, 

C.  A.  SHELTO\T, 

San   Francisco,  3Oth   March,   1852." 


25-8 

This  letter  is  copied  here,  as  a  partial  confirmation  of  my  own 
statements. 

We  extended  our  agricultural  operations  in  1852  by  purchas- 
ing more  farming  land,  fencing  and  placing  tenants  upon  such 
as  we  did  not  wish  to  use  ourselves,  they  working  it  on  shares. 
After  planting  was  over,  I  sent  my  brother  back  to  New  Jersey 
on  business  and  he  brought  out  with  him  my  father  and  mother 
and  all  their  children  and  children's  children,  two  of  my  wife's 
sisters,  and  a  brother,  and  some  other  young  people,  some 
twenty-two  souls.  He  arrived  home  in  the  fall  all  safe,  and  in 
time  to  take  the  place  he  had  left  in  the  firm  of  J.  M.  Horner 
&  Co.  for  selling  our  large  crop  now  ready  for  market.  We 
continued  our  prosperous  career,  buying  more  lands  and  farming 
them  ourselves  or  letting  them  out  to  tenants  until  our  potato 
crop  reached  the  enormous  quantity  of  twenty-two  million  (22,- 
000,000)  pounds  in  1853.  We  also  had  this  year  fifteen  hundred 
acres  of  wheat  and  barley,  besides  cabbages,  tomatoes  and  onions 
in  quantities. 

California  had  not  only  supplied  herself  with  vegetables  this 
year  for  the  first  time;  but  produced  a  large  surplus  which  could 
not  be  used  or  sold  and  was  never  sent  to  market. 

There  being  no  mill  in  the  State  to  convert  wheat  into  flour, 
we  built  one  at  Union  City  with  eight  run  of  burrs,  at  a  cost  of 
eighty-five  thousand  dollars,  and  ground  ours  and  others  grain. 
The  following  is  the  award  of  the  committee  on  the  first  flour 
ever  exhibited  at  an  Agricultural  Fair  in  California. 

Committee's  report  on  California  flour  1853.  The  undersigned, 
committee  on  flour,  assembled  at  the  store  of  Colt  and  Beals 
to  investigate  the  eight  samples  of  California  made  flour  ex- 
hibited at  your  (Coin.  Warren's)  Agricultural  Fair  in  competition 
for  the  award  of  a  fifty  dollar  cup.  The  committee  of  three  are 
old  New  York  flour  merchants,  and  have  given  each  of  the  sam- 
ples submitted  to  us  their  full  share  of  attention.  We  would 
premise,  that  three  of  the  samples  were  inferior  in  quality,  two 
defective  in  color,  and  for  the  credit  of  the  mills,  should  never 
have  been  sent  to  the  fair,  evidently  being  made  of  unsound 
and  inferior  wheat.  One  sample  badly  bolted,  five  samples  were 
all  of  choice  quality,  and  deserving  of  special  commendation,  and 
each  worthy  of  the  brand  of  Extra  Family  Flour.  The  commit- 
tee reduced  by  careful  comparisons  and  tests,  the  five  samples 


259 

marked  A.  C.  E.  F.  G.  down  to  three  C.  E.  F.  and  after  com- 
paring them  for  a  half-hour  finely  decided  to  mix  up  the  three 
samples  into  dough,  which  test  reduced  us  to  two  samples  E. 
and  F.  and  though  unanimous  in  our  judgment  that  E.  was  in 
all  respects  the  best  flour,  and  accordingly  decided  that  that  was 
the  premium  sample,  and  entitled  fully  to  the  award  of  a  silver 
cup.  We  feel  convinced  that  the  three  are  worthy  of  special 
mention. 

After  declaring  the  award,  we  proceeded  to  open  the  key  to 
the  initial,  and  found  that  "Horner's  Mills"  of  Union  City  was 
represented  by  "E;"  that  the  "Bernice  Mills,"  J.  F.  Houghton 
agent,  was  "F;"  and  that  "C"  represented  the  "Washington 
Mills,"  W.  Van  Court,  of  San  Francisco;  "G"  represented  the 
"Happy  Valley  Mills,"  Fitch  &  Co.;  and  "last  though  not  least, 
"A"  represented  the  "San  Joaquin  Steam  Mills,"  Calvin  Page 
Si  Co.  proprietors.  Since  making  our  award,  we  have  called  in 
a  fourth  New  York  flour  dealer,  and  to  whom  the  eight  samples 
were  submitted;  and  we  are  happy  to  say  that  the  gentleman 
without  hesitation  threw  out  the  three  inferior  samples  as  un- 
worthy a  place  in  the  exhibition,  and  of  the  remaining  five  sam- 
ples, his  opinion,  in  all  respects,  corresponded  with  our  own, 
which,  to  himself  was  a  surprise,  though  to  the  committee  a  very 
satisfactory  test,  that  we  had  decided  righteously.  All  of  which 
is  respectfully  submitted. 

H.  CHANING  BEALS. 
E.  T.  PEAS. 
WM.   S.   ALTON. 

Committee.- 

We  equipped  and  run  a  stage  line  in  connection  with  our 
steamer,  as  far  up  the  valley  as  San  Jose,  opened  sixteen  miles 
of  public  road,  mostly  through  our  own  lands,  and  fenced  the 
larger  part  on  both  sides.  These  roads  have  never  been  changed, 
save  to  narrow  them  to  sixty-six  feet,  we  had  fenced  them  one 
hundred  feet  wide. 

Money  and  other  values  increased  rapidly  in  our  hands,  and 
having  more  confidence  in  banks  of  earth,  than  in  commercial 
money  banks,  we  seldom  permitted  our  deposits  in  the  latter  to 
exceed,  at  any  one  time,  thirty  thousand  dollars,  before  we 
started  some  enterprise  or  invested  it  in  real  estate,  mostly  the 


260 

latter.  However,  the  unsettled  state  of  land  titles  rendered  in- 
vestments in  land  almost  as  hazardous  as  depositing  in  com- 
mercial banks,  as  we  found  to  our  cost.  Under  the  administra- 
tion of  Mexican  laws,  but  little  trouble  would  have  arisen;  but 
the  United  States,  claimed  the  right  and  did  oppose  all  land 
titles,  and  required  proof  of  their  genuineness  to  be  made  before 
its  land  commission,  reserving  the  right  of  appeal  to  its  District 
Court,  in  the  event,  the  commissioners  decided  against  the  Gov- 
ernment, and  to  appeal  again  to  its  Supreme  Court,  should  the 
District  Court  decide  against  it.  Thus  years  of  costly  law  suits, 
and  in  some  cases  ruin  to  owners  of  land  titles  before  final  set- 
tlement. We  suffered  from  the  laws  delay  in  settling  titles,  and 
from  squatters  keeping  from  us  by  force,  a  goodly  portion  of  our 
lands,  being  encouraged  by  the  Government,  to  do  so;  for  as 
long  as  the  Government  withheld  final  confirmation  the  squatter 
continued  to  hold  possession,  however  good  the  title,  no  court 
or  jury  would  oust  them  from  your  land.  We  suffered  more 
mentally  and  financially  during  these  years  from  the  above  named 
causes,  than  from  all  floods  and  four-footed  animals  in  former 
years. 

When  I  arrived  first  at  the  Mission  all  the  mission  lands,  out- 
side of  the  buildings  and  a  small  vineyard,  was  believed  to  be- 
long to  the  Government,  and  it  was  placed  temporarily  in  the 
hands  of  Padra  Real,  a  Catholic  Priest,  as  agent,  to  him  I  applied 
for  and  did  rent  a  certain  piece  of  land;  but  when  I  commenced 
work  upon  it,  1  was  met  by  an  Indian,  who  claimed  the  right  to 
occupy  that  land.  Upon  enquiry  of  those  supposed  to  know 
I  was  satisfied  he  held  a  right  there;  but  had  no  papers.  So 
after  that  I  dealt  with  him  instead  of  with  the  priest.  I  finely 
bought  his  claim  for  six  hundred  dollars  and  raised  my  first 
paying  crop  upon  this  land.  Before  my  second  crop  was  harvest- 
ed one  James  F.  Reed,  a  merchant  living  near  me,  brought  to  me 
a  map  of  this  land,  and  what  was  claimed  to  be  a  provisional 
grant  by  Mexico  to  another  civilized  Indian.  This  annoyed  me, 
but  as  there  was  no  record  writhin  reach  and  rather  then  risk  a 
law  suit,  I  acknowledged  his  claim  and  paid  him  seven  thousand 
dollars  for  it.  The  Indian  however  when  selling  to  him  had  re- 
served to  himself  a  life  time  right  of  occupancy;  but  as  he  only 
wished  to  use  a  small  piece  of  the  land,  there  was  no  conflict 
between  us,  we  lived  very  friendly,  although  his  house  was  just 


26l 

across  a  small  brook  about  one  hundred  feet  distant  from  mine. 
After  a  few  years  he  wished  to  leave,  and  I  bought  his  life  right 
to  the  land  for  six  hundred  dollars.  I  must  testify,  according 
to  my  belief,  that  if  there  ever  was  a  Christian  Indian  this  was 
one.  He  naturally  seemed  to  scorn  all  wrong  acts  and  always 
tried  to  do  good,  anyone  wishing  to  do  the  fair  thing  could  always 
get  along  with  him.  He  was  quiet  and  intelligent  much  above 
the  ordinary  Indian,  spoke  readily  the  Spanish  language  and 
aped  as  far  as  he  was  able  the  Spanish  people.  These  qualifica- 
tions no  doubt  had  their  effect  upon  the  Mexican  officials  when 
they  condescended  to  make  him  a  grant  for  four  hundred  acres 
of  land.  After  the  immigration  of  1849  there  began  to  be  some 
hard  characters  in  the  country,  and  acts  of  violence  was  fre- 
quently reported.  He  proposed  to  me  one  day,  "that  as  there 
was  so  many  bad  men  in  the  country,  and  as  we  were  friends  and 
neighbors  and  each  had  a  wife  and  family  to  care  for,  we  should 
each  protect  the  other's  family,  when  either  was  from  home, 
if  I  was  from  home  he  would  look  after  mine,  if  he  was  away 
I  was  to  look  after  his,"  to  which  I  agreed.  Upon  my  return 
soon  after,  from  a  night's  absence,  he  came  to  me  and  stated 
"he  had  got  up  three  times  during  the  night,  and  each  time  went 
quietly  around  my  house  and  all  being  still  within,  believed  all 
was  right,  and  went  back  to  his  own  house."  He  was  more 
honest  than  I,  for  I  never  done  so  much  as  that  when  he  was 
away,  though  nothing  happened  to  them. 

While  engaged  planting  our  1850  crop  one  Juan  B.  Alvarado 
and  Andrew  Pico,  both  ex-Governors  of  California  under  Mexico, 
sent  an  agent  who  presented  to  me  a  title  or  grant  from  the 
Mexican  Government  to  these  gentlemen,  of  the  whole  ex-mis- 
sion tract  containing  thirty  thousand  acres,  including  my  farm, 
which  I  had  bought  twice  already,  and  wanted  to  sell  me  the 
whole  tract.  In  submitting  these  papers  to  lawyers  for  their 
examination,  their  opinion  was  the  grant  was  a  good  one.  So 
there  was  no  alternative  for  us,  but  to  leave,  rent  or  buy,  after 
considerable  hesitancy  on  our  part,  enquiry  and  negotiation  we 
in  connection  with  George  B.  Tingly,  a  lawyer,  and  E.  L.  Beard, 
a  farmer  on  this  same  ex-mission  land,  bought  their  claim  for 
which  we  gave  our  joint  notes  for  forty-nine  thousand  dollars 
($49,000),  to  be  paid  at  some  future  time.  When  the  notes 
matured  neither  Mr.  Tingly  nor  Mr.  Beard  were  able  to  meet 
their  share  of  these  obligations.  I  reluctently  paid  the  money. 


262 

Mr.  Tingly  deeded  to  me  his  share  of  the  property,  Mr.  Beard 
also  offered  to  deed  to  me  his  third  interest,  but  I  permitted 
him  to  retain  it,  and  he  afterwards  repaid  to  me  the  money  I 
advanced  to  him.  Soon  after  this  grant  was  confirmed  by  United 
States  Land  Commission  and  an  appeal  taken  to  the  United 
States  District  Court.  While  this  title  was  being  adjudicated 
the  squatters  took  possession  of  much  of  these  lands,  particularly 
those  inside  our  fences,  which  we  were  not  cultivating.  We  paid 
taxes  upon  the  property  and  built  some  twenty-five  miles  of 
fencing,  yet  realizing  nothing  from  them,  except  from  those  parts 
we  had  under  cultivation,  the  squatters  alone  prevented.  Con- 
firmed grants  in  the  lower  courts,  with  good  fences,  did  not  con- 
stitute either  ownership,  or  possession,  according  to  the  squatter's 
creed  of  justice  and  law.  Their  creed  appeared  to  be  "the  good 
old  plan,"  "let  those  take  who  have  the  power,  and  those  keep 
who  can."  We  purchased  nineteen  hundred  and  fifty  acres  of 
a  confirmed  grant  of  excellent  land,  bording  on  the  north-western 
boundary  of  the  Mission  tract,  and  paid  for  the  same,  fifty-eight 
thousand  five  hundred  dollars,  we  raised  our  heaviest  crops  on 
these  lands,  fenced  and  farmed  all  of  them,  either  direct  or  by 
tenants;  with  the  exception  of  some  small  pieces  envolving  only 
a  few  hundred  acres,  the  above  comprised  all  our  purchase  of 
real  estate  in  what  is  now  Alameda  County.  California. 

Some  San  Jose  City  lots  and  a  hotel  involving  an  outlay  of 
nine  thousand  dollars  comprised  the  extent  of  our  possessions 
in  Santa  Clara  County. 

In  1851-2  we  in  connection  with  others  purchased  what  was 
known  as  "Potrero  Nuevo,"  comprising  2,100  acres  (a  Spanish- 
Mexican  grant),  now  a  part  of  the  city  of  San  Francisco.  Our 
undivided  share  of  the  property  was  four  hundred  and  fifty  acres, 
we  joined  in  the  expense  of  surveying  and  staking  out  streets 
and  lots  upon  it.  This  property  was  well  fenced  by  the  bay, 
by  creeks  and  a  stone  wall,  the  former  owner  used  it  for  a  pasture. 
This  land  was  soon  covered  with  squatters,  contrary  to  our 
rights,  under  our  grant  and  our  right  of  possession  as  indicated 
by  our  fence.  They  run  their  lines  around  large  pieces  and  com- 
menced selling  at  cheap  rates  to  innocent  parties,  in  small  lots 
and  blocks  according  to  the  plan  we  had  surveyed  and  staked 
them;  by  which  means  the  squatters  and  those  purchasing  from 
them  soon  became  so  numerous,  that  no  jury  empanelled  to  try 
the  case  would  ever  decide  the  case,  however  clear  the  proof. 


Soon  after  this  purchase  we  bought  a  confirmed  grant  contain- 
ing near  five  thousand  acres,  and  paid  for  it  two  hundred  thou- 
sand dollars.  This  land  is  situated  just  above  the  last  purchase 
(the  Potrero)  and  it  is  now  a  part  of  the  city  of  San  Francisco. 
We  spent  considerable  money  on  this  land  in  surveys,  fencing 
and  improvements.  Some  six  hundred  acres  adjoining  the  city, 
as  it  then  existed,  we  laid  out  in  lots,  blocks  and  streets,  and 
made  them  conform  to  those  already  laid  out  by  the  city. 

We  named  the  streets,  which  names  are  still  retained,  and  the 
property  is  assessed  as  situated  in  "Horner's  Addition,"  and  in 
a  separate  set  of  books  from  other  city  property.  The  above 
includes  about  all  of  our  real  estate  purchased  in  California  up 
to  1854.  These  lands  with  our  personal  effects  comprised  our 
property  at  this  time.  Our  personal  property  consisted  of 
steamer  "Union,"  costing  $18,000;  flouring  mill,  costing  $85,000; 
stage  line,  warehouse,  farm  houses,  out  houses,  30  miles  of  fenc- 
ing, costing  $900  per  mile,  farming  tools  and  livestock  of  good 
quality  and  sufficient  in  number  to  enable  us  to  plant  and  harvest 
our  large  crops  in  good  season. 

From  the  above  showing  it  may  readily  be  conjectured,  that 
I  was  a  man  of  note  at  that  time,  or  at  least  a  man  of  liberal 
means,  in  so  young  a  State  as  California  then  was,  and  among 
so  few  people  as  it  then  contained.  And  inasmuch  as  we  had 
produced  this  wealth  from  the  soil  of  a  new  and  untried  country, 
and  no  charge  was  ever  made,  that  we  had  acquired  any  part 
of  it  by  speculation,  or  by  overreaching  our  neighbors  in  trade. 
So  the  credit  due  us  was  readily  granted  by  all  acquainted  with 
the  circumstances. 

The  present  facilities  for  working  in  California  would  render 
the  work  done  by  us,  the  first  years  of  our  farming  there,  too 
insignificant  by  comparison  to  refer  to:  but  when  the  situation, 
the  material,  tools,  animals,  and  the  class  of  labor  we  had  to 
use,  is  considered,  it  may  not  look  so  easy. 

The  country  was  in  a  wild  state,  not  a  tree  or  bush  upon  the 
land  to  be  used,  fencing  to  be  hauled  25  miles  over  a  natural 
road  bed,  bridges,  none  except  what  we  made  ourselves  over 
brooks,  rivers  and  slough.  Indians  were  our  first  workmen. 
Thirty  miles  had  to  be  traveled  to  get  either  blacksmithing  or 
milling  done,  and  seventy-five  miles  to  reach  a  market.  The 


264 

walls  of  houses  were  made  of  sundried  brick,  joists  and  rafters 
were  (in  some  cases)  dragged  25  miles  over  rocks  and  gravel  part 
of  the  way,  which  wore  away  much  of  the  stick  before  reaching 
their  destination;  no  nails,  spikes  or  hinges  were  to  be  had,  raw 
hide  must  answer  instead,  sheeting  was  fastened  to  the  rafters 
with  raw  hide  and  the  doors  were  hung  with  raw  hide  hinges  in 
some  cases.  A  cart,  even  such  as  high-toned  ladies  (Spanish) 
often  rode  in  (and  there  was  no  dispute  about  their  being  ladies, 
educated,  and  with  the  manners  and  politeness  of  a  Chesterfield), 
were  made  entirely  of  wood  and  raw  hide,  no  nails,  spikes,  rivets 
or  bolts  were  to  be  had  for  the  purpose.  The  wheels  were  hewn 
out  of  solid  logs,  the  spokes,  hubs,  felloes  and  tire  were  one 
piece,  the  wheel  left  a  track  on  the  ground  when  in  motion,  six 
or  eight  inches  wide,  and  was  from  two  and  one-half  to  three  and 
one-half  feet  high,  the  frame  of  the  body  was  made  of  hewn 
timber,  as  was  the  axle-tree,  the  stakes  were  round  poles  about 
six  feet  high  with  other  poles  lashed  horizontally  to  the  stakes 
with  raw  hide  strings,  a  bullock  hide  laid  on  the  bottom,  an- 
swered for  bottom  boards  to  the  cart  and  another  stretched  tight- 
ly across  the  top  of  the  stakes  served  as  a  sunshade,  sometimes 
the  inside  was  lined  temporally  with  costly  red  blankets,  which 
made  the  inside  look  nice  and  cosy.  The  ox  yokes  were  without 
bows,  made  of  a  straight  stick  three  by  six  inches  square,  five 
and  one-half  feet  long,  straight  with  the  exception  of  a  small 
curve  near  each  end  to  fit  the  upper  part  of  the  oxe's  neck  near 
the  horns.  This  stick  was  lashed  to  the  head  and  horns  of  the 
ox,  just  back  of  the  horns,  by  a  long  strip  of  raw  hide  one  and 
one-half  inches  wide.  A  substitute  for  ox  chains  was  raw  hide. 
Fences  were  made  of  stakes  set  in  the  ground  and  poles  lashed 
to  them  horizontally  with  raw  hide.  The  usual  way  of  driving 
two  or  more  yoke  of  oxen  was,  one  man  on  horseback  to  lead 
and  stop  the  team  when  required,  two  more  men  on  horses,  one 
on  each  side  equipped  with  a  long  sharp  stick  to  punch  up  the 
oxen,  and  make  them  follow  their  leader,  and  one  in  the  cart, 
also  armed  with  a  sharp  stick  to  prick  up  the  rear  span,  should 
they  require  it.  To  turn  the  team  to  the  right  prick  or  scare  the 
left  hand  ox  to  make  him  step  ahead  of  his  mate,  this  turns  their 
heads  to  the  right,  as  the  yokes  being  tightly  fastened  to  their 
heads,  when  one's  head  turns,  both  heads  turn. 

The  rich,  although   worth  many  thousands  of  dollars  could 


not,  or  at  least  did  not,  ride  in  carriages,  there  was  no  carriages 
or  horses  broken  to  draw  in  harness  in  those  primitive  times  in 
the  territory.  The  Indians  were  the  principle  mechanics,  they 
made  the  carts,  saddles,  shoes,  houses  and  did  most  of  the  agri- 
cultural labor.  We  did  not  only  produce  the  wealth  above  re- 
ferred to  from  the  elements ;  but  at  least  double  that  amount  had 
been  produced  by  us,  which  we  had  paid  away  for  labor,  material 
and  other  expenses.  After  1849  gd  farm  laborers  commanded 
seventy  dollars  per  month  and  board,  mechanics  were  propor- 
tionally high.  We  employed  many  of  all  classes,  some  employed 
by  us  were  saving  of  their  earnings,  and  thus  laid  a  foundation 
for  the  fortunes  they  afterwards  acquired. 

The  position  I  held  in  the  community  at  this  time  made  me 
much  sought  after  as  an  endorser  of  notes,  a  signer  of  bonds  and 
a  leaner  of  money  to  the  impecunious.  As  I  had  been  raised 
in  a  purely  rural  District  of  New  Jersey  and  unacquainted  even 
in  theory  with  the  "tricks  of  trade,''  the  evil  effects  of  note  en- 
dorsement or  loaning  money  without  adequate  security,  I  loaned 
and  endorsed  freely,  hoping  to  do  good  thereby.  I  have  no  re- 
collection of  refusing  anyone  who  asked  for  an  accommodation 
or  requested  to  have  their  note  endorsed  up  to  and  including 
1853. 

Our  prospects  at  this  time  were  bright  and  our  property  ample 
to  gratify  every  wish,  and  yearly  increasing,  and  as  I  nor  my 
brother  either  ever  drank,  smoked,  gambled  or  dissipated  in 
any  way,  no  cloud  of  doubt  ever  crossed  our  mental  visions, 
that  our  property  should  not  always  continue  to  increase,  as 
we  attended  strictly  to  business.  Our  crops  were  large  this  year, 
we  viewed  them  as  ample  to  pay  every  endorsement  and  every 
obligation  we  had  out,  as  well  as  to  pay  the  expense  of  harvesting 
and  marketing  them.  Our  property  was  unincumbered,  our 
business  large  and  in  full  operation. 

Such  was  our  possessions,  prospects  and  position  when  the 
first  wave  of  money  panic  struck  California,  and  swept  over 
America  with  such  disastrous  results  from  1853  to  1859.  It  is 
said  that  during  two  months  in  1857  in  New  York,  discounts 
at  the  bank  fell  off  $24,000,000,  deposits  $40,000,000,  interest 
went  up  to  36  per  cent,  per  annum,  and  six  thousand  failures,  in- 
volving an  indebtedness  of  $300,000,000.  Yet  how  small  is  this 
large  sum,  when  compared  to  the  direct  and  indirect  loss  endured 

18 


266 

by  the  whole  people  during  these  years  of  panic.  The  breaking 
up  of  business,  the  depreciation  of  property,  the  enforced  idleness 
of  labor  and  machinery  and  the  check  to  enterprise,  all  com- 
bined to  make  up  a  loss  impossible  to  compute;  besides  the 
above,  the  heartache  and  mental  anguish  arising  from  loss  of 
business  and  property.  Men  of  families,  wealth  and  enterprise 
driven  from  their  homes  and  reduced  to  poverty,  and  in  conse- 
quence on  the  Pacific  Coast,  self  destruction  was  resorted  too,  to 
end  their  misery;  some  poisoned  themselves,  some  shot  them- 
selves, some  went  crazy,  etc. 

The  sum  of  this  suffering  was  great  and  should  be  reckoned 
with  the  pecuniary  losses;  all  of  which  were  brought  on  the 
people  by  our  imperfect  currency  laws,  which  caused  the  panic. 
This  loss  cannot  be  measured  by  dollars  and  cents,  no  power 
but  the  supreme  can  take  account  of  the  sufferings  of  the  human 
heart.  Upon  the  first  appearance  of  the  panic  on  the  Pacific 
Coast,  business  began  to  shrink,  property  decreased  rapidly  in 
value,  money  gradually  withdrew  from  circulation,  business 
failures  were  frequent,  larger  interest  was  exacted  for  the  use  of 
money,  more  property  was  demanded  as  security  for  a  given  sum, 
laborers  were  turned  adrift  by  thousands  (some  becoming  tramps, 
families  of  the  less  fortunate)  doubled  up,  that  is,  two  or  more 
were  compelled  to  occupy  one  house  in  the  towns,  which  before 
was  hardly  thought  ample  for  one,  and  squeezed  along  with  scant 
clothing  and  still  scantier  food.  At  the  same  time  thousands 
of  tons  of  farm  products  were  never  sent  to  market,  no  sale,  good 
potatoes  ten  cents  per  bushel,  but  there  was  no  ten  cents,  all 
this  happened  in  the  Golden  State  where  millions  of  gold  and 
silver  were  dug  from  the  mines  every  month,  and  tons  of  it  were 
hoarded  in  banks  and  treasury  vaults,  gloated  over  and  wor- 
shipped, a  man  with  a  few  hundred  dollars  in  gold  coin  was 
independent,  while  the  owner  of  property  that  cost  thousands 
of  gold  dollars,  was  hard  up  and  in  many  cases  let  it  be  sold  for 
taxes,  and  never  redeemed  it,  so  worthless  was  property  con- 
sidered during  the  pinching  part  of  the  panic,  many  with  ready 
money,  held  it  for  purchasing  properties  at  these  depreciated 
rates.  Later  money  could  not  be  borrowed  on  real  estate,  but 
real  estate  could  be  bought  under  the  sheriff's  hammer  for  one- 
fourth,  one-sixth,  etc.,  of  what  the  property  was  worth  a  few 
months  before.  These  are  facts,  brought  upon  the  country  by 


267 

its  imperfect,  cruel  currency  laws.  I  am  writing  from  memory 
but  these  things  are  indelibly  engraved  upon  my  mind.  I  was 
an  active  participant,  I  may  say  an  acute  sufferer  in  those  scenes. 

The  large  endorsements  above  referred  to,  now  came  on  to 
be  paid  by  us,  and  as  endorsement  creditors  were  exacting, 
money  must  be  had,  products  yielded  no  surplus  in  these  panicy 
times  from  which  we  could  draw;  we  for  the  first  time  com- 
menced mortgaging  our  property  and  at  this  time  money  was  not 
to  be  borrowed  in  San  Francisco  on  our  San  Francisco  real 
estate.  We  did  however  succeed  in  mortgaging  it  to  C.  K. 
Garrison  for  $50,000,  interest  4%  per  month,  compounded  month- 
ly and  payable  in  advance.  He  drew  on  New  York,  we  received 
the  money  there. 

This  $50,000  was  about  one-sixth  of  the  amount  we  had  paid 
for  the  property  and  the  improvements,  but  it  was  enough,  as 
it  swept  away  the  entire  property.  Thus  slipped  from  us  $250,000 
Our  $18,000  steamer  went  for  $7,000  to  pay  an  endorsement 
creditor.  In  parting  with  our  $85,000  flouring  mill  we  did  a  little- 
better  but  the  panic  continued  so  long  and  was  so  heavy  upon 
property  the  purchaser  sold  it  for  $5,000,  this  property  had  been 
depreciated  $80,000  by  the  panic.  The  San  Jose  Mission  lands 
that  had  cost  us  $70,000  including  improvements  .went  from 
us  for  an  endorsement  debt  of  $10,000.  However  the  squatters 
had  done  as  much  to  render  this  property  of  little  value  as 
the  panic.  Our  home  farm  of  1000  acres  which  we  had  pur- 
chased four  times  went  off  for  an  endorsement  of  $7,000. 

How  our  other  property  went  I  am  not  clear,  only  on  one 
point,  that  is,  it  left,  houses  and  lands,  horses  and  cattle,  and 
farm  products  at  the  depreciated  rates,  effected  but  little  in  pay- 
ing endorsement  or  other  debts  running  at  a  high  rate  of  in- 
terest, compounded  monthly,  with  the  addition  of  sheriff's  and 
lawyer's  fees  and  court  expenses. 

Property  was  so  seemingly  valueless  no  creditor  wanted  it, 
it  was  money,  money  and  nothing  but  money  was  wanted,  and 
money  was  not  to  be  had.  It  had  ceased  to  circulate  except  to 
a  limited  extent.  Although  my  endorsements  did  not  exceed 
$40,000  the  high  rate  of  interest  compounded  monthly  and  other 
expenses  forced  from  us  over  $70,000  before  they  were  fully  sat- 
isfied, and  that  was  paid  by  the  sacrifice  of  property  sold  at  one- 
sixth  of  what  it  had  been  worth  the  previous  four  years.  Prop- 


268 

erty  costing  us  $280,000  in  gold  coin  was  swept  away  to  pay  a 
forty  thousand  dollar  endorsement.  If  the  payment  of  the  endors- 
ed notes  had  been  exacted  before  the  panic,  we  could  have  paid 
them  without  embarrassment,  in  fact,  had  the  panic  not  come 
the  endorsed  notes  would  have  been  paid  by  their  maker,  as  he 
had  ample  means  before  his  property  was  rendered  almost  value- 
less by  the  panic. 

The  above  briefly  shows  how  the  property  referred  to  was 
produced  and  approximately  how  it  was  rendered  almost  value- 
less by  that  curse  to  enterprise  and  industry,  a  money  panic.  We 
had  no  fears  nor  thougths  that  the  laws  and  customs  of  our 
country,  that  forces  all  business  done  with  money,  all  taxes, 
tariffs,  debts  and  dues  to  be  paid  in  money  had  not  provided 
amply  the  money  necessary  for  doing  the  business  of  the  country, 
even  should  private  parties  hoard  theirs ;  but  by  bitter  experience 
we  have  learned  different.  Our  comparatively  large  property 
was  swept  from  us  so  quickly  as  to  be  bewildering. 

Had  we  been  caught  in  the  stock  market  or  been  spendthrifts 
gamblers,  idle  and  dissipated,  our  property  would  not  have  left 
us  more  surely  and  more  quickly.  Yet  the  difference  is  wide  in 
principle  between  the  way  ours  left  us  and  the  way  property  may 
leave  the  gambler;  while  the  latter  brings  the  evil  upon  them- 
selves, they  are  brought  upon  the  industrious  and  enterprising, 
by  the  government  shirking  a  confided  duty,  and  thus  opens  the 
way  and  renders  possible  money  panics.  A  hint  of  its  evils  may 
be  seen  in  the  foregoing  pages.  Had  I  not  been  burdened  by 
endorsements  I  should  still  suffer,  by  the  breaking  up  of  my 
large  business,  and  I  was  only  one  of  a  class,  numerous  all  over 
the  country.  How  cruel!  Oh,  how  cruel!  in  our  Government 
to  leave  the  country  subject  to  the  curse  of  money  panics,  when 
a  simple  law  would  prevent  it. 

The  money  system  outlined  in  this  book  if  adopted  would 
render  money  panics  impossible.  The  above  losses  and  suffering 
stimulate  the  production  of  this  book,  had  I  a  good  cause  to  labor 
for.  Incidently  I  will  remark  that  as  afflictions  seldom  come 
single,  it  did  not  in  my  case,  as  aside  from  the  loss  of  my  property 
I  was  otherwise  afflicted.  My  only  daughter  sickened  and  died 
while  my  property  was  being  confiscated.  I  was  personally 
afflicted,  a  lock-jaw  set  in  with  a  heavy  fever,  which  lasted  for  a 
long  time,  my  life  was  despaired  of  by  my  physicians  and  friends. 


269 

An  unexpected  favorable  change  took  place;  but  my  recovery 
was  slow  and  my  sickness  left  me  with  but  little  use  of  my  legs; 
and  for  weeks  I  used  a  crutch  whe,n  moving  around,  I  stated  in 
the  commencement  of  this  narrative  that  "my  star  of  hope  rose 
early  and  had  never  set  beneath  the  horizon."  At  this  time  it 
nearly  went  down,  I  finally  regained  my  strength  after  months 
of  mental  and  physical  suffering  and  with  it  came  slowly  back 
my  ambition,  for  all  of  which  I  am  humbly  thankful  to  my 
Heavenly  Father,  not  for  these  only  am  I  thankful,  but  as  in  the 
case  of  Job  I  have  been  blessed  again  with  health,  wealth  and  an 
influence  beyond  my  most  ambitious  anticipations  and  last  though 
not  least  have  been  blessed  with  more  sons  and  daughters.  I 
have  lived  longer  since  my  loss  and  suffering  than  I  had  before 
those  troublesome  times.  I  was  granted  a  new  lease  of  life  by 
the  Great  One,  and  for  a  purpose  not  known  to  me. 

However,  in  the  absence  of  any  other  more  worthy  visible  ob- 
ject, I  have  thought  perhaps  it  was  required  of  me  to  show  many 
of  the  evils  resulting  from  our  present  money  systems,  and  invent, 
work  out  and  make  known  a  more  perfect  way.  Whether  this 
is  a  correct  surmise  or  only  a  welcome  thought,  the  endeavor  to 
perform  it  has  a  been  delightful  labor.  Inventions  of  various 
kinds,  improvements  of  machinery,  plantation  cares,  schools, 
temperance,  politics,  my  duty  as  a  legislator  in  the  formulation 
of  what  I  consider  good  laws,  and  preventing  the  enactment  of 
bad  ones,  and  other  objects  have  in  turn  occupied  my  mind,  but 
none  was  ever  clamoring  for  consideration  so  persistently  as  this 
money  system.  It  has  been  impressed  upon  my  mind  with  a  per- 
sistence not  to  be  ignored  and  I  have  willingly  accepted  the 
charge  and  expended  some  money,  and  much  time  and  labor 
upon  it. 

It  is  well,  perhaps,  that  a  part  of  the  burden  of  the  great  ques- 
tion of  money  supply  should  rest  upon  one  that  had  suffered, 
thereby  qualifying  him  more  perfectly  for  the  work.  So  my 
property  and  business  leaving  me  at  the  same  time,  gave  me 
opportunity  for  reflection  as  to  why  and  how  my  property  had 
left  me  without  my  consent.  I  learned  by  studying  the  question 
that  it  was  our  imperfect  money  system  that  had  caused  the 
trouble,  that  money  panics  were  of  frequent  occurrence  in  times 
past,  that  their  evil  effects  were  wide  spread  and  very  disastrous, 
that  I  was  onlv  one  of  a  numerous  class  that  had  suffered  in  this 


270 

particular  panic,  which  in  connection  with  the  1873  panic,  caused 
me  to  think  long  and  deep  as  to  the  cause  and  cure  of  money 
panics.  I  readily  satisfied  myself  as  to  the  cause,  but  the  remedy 
was  not  so  easily  arrived  at.  This  book  is  the  result  of  my  labors. 
I  verily  believe  the  system  herein  outlined  is  constitutional,  that 
no  money  panic  can  ever  occur  in  any  country  where  this  system 
is  in  operation  and  we  think  all  must  believe  the  same  who  reads 
and  mentally  digests  its  contents. 

The  loss  of  my  property  placed  me  financially  where  I  had 
commenced  seven  years  before,  as  nothing  of  much  value  was 
saved  from  the  wreck,  except  my  experience,  my  prospects  even 
were  dark,  cloudy  and  discouraging.  I  gave  up  my  carriage 
team  and  my  watch  from  my  pocket,  and  commenced  physical 
labor  again  to  support  my  family.  I  did  the  best  I  could,  the 
panic  ceased,  and  its  evil  effects  wore  gradually  away  from  the 
country.  I  rented  my  old  homestead  and  after  a  time  bought  it 
again,  this  making  the  fifth  time  I  had  purchased  it,  the  paying 
for  it  was  slow  work. 

One  of  my  first  ventures  after  recovery  from  my  sickness  was 
the  building  of  a  bridge  over  the  Alameda  river,  under  a  contract 
with  the  county.  I  saved  over  three  hundred  dollars  out  of  the 
job.  I  contracted  to  drain  a  small  lake  in  the  neighborhood, 
got  well  paid  for  my  labor,  as  in  both  cases  I  personally  did 
much  of  the  labor.  The  owners  of  a  piece  of  land  in  San  Francis- 
co not  having  a  clear  idea  as  to  their  title  to  it,  offered  us  (my 
brother  and  myself)  a  share  of  what  we  could  get  out  of  it,  if 
we  would  work  it  up;  we  got  several  thousand  dollars  for  this 
labor.  About  this  time  we  had  an  extra  dry  year  in  California, 
not  enough  rain  fell  to  mature  a  crop,  and  believing  vegetables 
would  be  a  paying  crop  in  the  Fall,  we  looked  around  for  an 
opportunity  of  producing  one  and  finding  Alameda  River  Mill 
was  idle  and  likely  to  remain  so  for  sometime,  having  no  grain 
to  grind,  and  in  consequence  the  water  rolled  into  the  bay  un- 
molested. We  rented  the  use  of  the  water  and  some  land  near 
by,  made  our  ditches  and  in  June  commenced  to  wet,  plow  and 
plant  a  crop  of  vegetables,  mostly  potatoes.  From  this  venture 
we  (my  brother  and  myself)  realized  some  seven  thousand  dollars. 
So  by  little  we  regained  our  feet;  but  meeting  with  loses  in  other 
farming  ventures  from  rust,  drought,  unsaleable  crops  and  other 


271 

causes,  our  progress  was  slow,  in  fact  rather  backward  the 
last  few  years  we  remained  in  California. 

In  1879  my  brother  and  I  made  a  contract  with  Mr.  Claus 
Spreckels  to  go  to  the  Sandwich  Islands  and  cultivate  sugar 
cane  for  him  on  shares.  In  fulfillment  of  this  contract  we  sold 
our  farms,  chartered  a  schooner  and  placed  therein  our  families,. 
18  souls;  our  household  effects,  our  horses  and  farming  tools, 
and  started  for  the  Islands,  where  we  arrived  on  the  25th  of 
December,  1879.  We  landed  on  Maui  this  time,  it  being  a 
different  Island  from,  the  one  we  had  stopped  at  on  our  wedding 
tour  thirty  years  before.  The  schooner  quickly  discharged  and 
we  commenced  hauling  our  lumber  which  we  had  brought  with 
us  for  building  our  houses  on  the  land  we  were  to  use,  about 
six  miles  distant.  We  erected  our  houses  and  soon  commenced 
our  plantation  work.  We  had  500  hundred  acres  of  land  alotted 
to  us.  My  brother  and  sons  worked  the  western  half,  I  and 
my  sons  the  eastern  half,  under  the  firm  name  of  "J.  M.  Homer 
&  Sons."  My  boys  did  all  our  plowing  and  team  work  in  pre- 
paring for  planting  and  growing  our  first  crop  of  240  acres. 

From  the  time  we  commenced  preparing  for  planting  until  we 
got  returns  from  the  sale  of  our  sugars  two  full  years  rolled 
away.  In  consequence  of  our  planting  a  much  larger  area  than 
we  contracted  to  plant  the  first  year  J.  M.  Horner  &  Sons  bor- 
rowed $40,000.  Our  crop  did  well,  exceeded  our  expectations 
in  both  yield  and  the  price  for  which  it  sold.  We  returned  the 
borrowed  money  with  the  interest  and  had  a  net  profit  from  our 
venture  of  $25,000.  Mr.  Spreckles  could  not  let  us  have  any 
more  land  to  cultivate,  and  as  250  acres  was  rather  a  small 
plantation  for  five  able  men  to  superintend,  seeing  it  only  requir- 
ed replanting  once  in  four  years,  and  further,  Mr.  Spreckels' 
superintendent  did  not  want  any  planters  on  the  plantation,  he 
preferred  doing  the  planting  as  well  as  the  milling.  So  I  and  one 
of  my  boys  went  prospecting  around  the  Island  of  Maui,  finding 
nothing  encouraging  there  I  and  another  boy  went  prospecting 
on  the  Island  of  Kauai,  openings  for  cane  planting  such  as  we 
were  looking  for  we  did  not  find  on  that  Island.  We  also  pros- 
pected the  cane  belt  on  the  large  Island  of  Hawaii.  Here  we 
contracted  with  owners  of  the  Pacific  Sugar  Mill  Co.  to  do  one- 
half  of  the  planting  for  their  mill,  and  one  of  my  boys  took  charge 
of  the  business.  Here  we  made  considerable  sugar,  increasing 


272 

the  yield  on  our  half  of  the  plantation  from  500  tons  per  year  to 
2,000.  We  had  accumulated  there  a  property  we  valued  at 
$150,000,  but  the  "McKinley  Bill"  so  effected  sugar  property 
here  we  sold  it  willingly  for  one-half  of  that  sum. 

On  this  same  prospecting  tour  we  rented  1,250  acres  (since 
increased  to  2,000)  of  good  wild  cane  land,  with  a  view  of  start- 
ing a  new  plantation.  This  was  rather  a  discouraging  work 
to  undertake,  as  the  land,  though  rich,  was  covered  with  a  jungle 
of  tress  and  brush  and  had  all  to  be  grubed  and  cleared  before  it 
could  be  used,  at  an  expense  of  $33  per  acre.  Besides  habita- 
tions for  superintendents,  quarters  for  150  or  200  laborers  and 
accommodations  for  more  than  half  of  that  number  of  horses 
had  to  be  provided,  as  well  as  the  horses  themselves,  and  plan- 
tation tools,  roads,  bridges,  (a  wagon  wheel  had  never  yet  turned 
upon  the  land),  fencing  and  mill  had  all  to  be  built,  as  well  as 
raising  the  cane. 

The  building  of  the  mill  and  bringing  the  plantation  up  to  a 
paying  point  would  involve  an  expenditure  of  over  $300,000,  to 
provide  this  sum  was  no  small  concern,  as  our  own  means  were 
small  when  compared  to  this  sum.  However,  our  unprecedented 
success  in  making  our  first  crop  gave  confidence  to  people  of 
means  that  whatever  we  undertook  in  the  way  of  cultivation 
would  be  a  success.  So  we  readily  found  means  to  carry  on  the 
planting  department  of  the  plantation.  A  gentleman  contracted 
with  me  to  build  the  mill,  he  to  own  one-half  when  built  and  we 
the  other  half  provided  we  repaid  to  him  one-half  the  cost  of  its 
construction,  with  the  interest  within  a  specified  time.  The  mill 
was  accordingly  built  at  a  cost  of  over  $180,000  and  we  returned 
his  money  as  agreed,  and  thereby  became  the  owners  of  one-half 
of  the  sugar  works  and  all  the  planting  interest,  which  gave  us 
three-fourths  of  all  the  sugar  manufactured  at  the  works.  With 
the  exception  of  four  half  dry  years  our  crops  have  been  good 
and  sometimes  excellent. 

Not  wishing  to  carry  all  our  eggs  in  one  basket  we  have  run- 
ning in  connection  with  the  plantation  a  cattle  and  horse  ranch, 
where  we  raise  all  the  horses  required  on  the  plantation  and  some 
for  sale.  There  are  400  head  of  horses  and  mules  on  the  ranch, 
besides  those  used  on  the  plantation,  over  2,000  horned  stock 
and  200  dairy  cows.  So  the  plantation  and  neighborhood  is 
supplied  with  butter  and  beef  from  the  ranch,  and  we  dispose  of 


273 

the  surplus  fat  stock  elsewhere.  The  past  few  years  we  have 
invested  a  few  thousand  dollars  in  the  cultivation  of  coffee,  which 
is  already  a  paying  venture. 

I  served  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Supervisors  in  Alameda 
County,  California,  and  two  sessions  as  Noble  in  the  Hawaiian 
Legislature. 

RETROSPECTION. 

Had  my  crop  .of  1849  failed,  California  no  doubt  would  have 
been  at  least  one  year  longer  supplying  itself  with  vegetables, 
particularly  potatoes,  as  I  had  all  the  potatoes  that  were  raised  in 
the  State  that  year,  and  if  my  farming  venture  had  failed  this 
year,  as  it  had  the  two  previous  years,  there  would  have  been  no 
seed  for  planting  in  1850,  or  had  I  not  been  in  the  State  how  long 
it  would  have  been  before  some  one  would  have  produced  the 
first  crop,  is  a  question  difficult  to  answer.  Yet  a  first  crop  seem- 
ed necessary  to  give  confidence  in  the  business.  A  few  people 
came  to  look  at  my  first  crop;  but  it  was  too  small  to  attract 
much  attention.  After  my  second  was  produced  others  began 
to  take  hold  of  the  business  in  a  small  way.  Our  third  crop 
wrought  wonderful  changes  in  the  minds  of  some  mechanics, 
sea  captains,  lawyers,  college  professors  and  other  classes,  went 
into  the  farming  business,  but  unfortunately  for  them,  by  the 
time  they  got  fairly  under  way  the  bottom  dropped  out  of  the 
market  and  most,  if  not,  all,  lost  their  money  and  labor. 

Despise  not  the  day  of  small  things.  I  may  truthfully  state 
I  never  looked  back  with  regret  over  my  California  losses.  I 
did  for  a  time  harbor  resentful  feelings  against  some  that  had 
aided  in  my  financial  ruin,  and  seemed  to  gloat  over  the  fact 
that  I  had  been  brought  down  from  what  they  thought  my  high 
position. 

No  one  that  must  depend  solely  upon  himself  for  success 
should  despise  or  shun  the  day  of  small  things,  but  "strike  out 
unaided,  depend  on  no  other."  "Strike  and  keep  striking,  till 
you  hit  the  right  spot."  "Perserverance  captures  the  game."  I 
never  looked  upon  myself  as  a  pauper,  I  always  endeavored  to 
keep  myself  employed,  when  I  could  not  do  so  I  worked  for 
others.  One  time  out  West  in  order  to  find  some  thing  to  do  I 
worked  for  nothing  for  a  short  time  and  found  myself.  (It  was 


274 

however,  a  donation  to  a  church.)  I  did  this  partly  to  get  ac- 
quainted with  the  contractors  and  those  who  had  work  to  do; 
that  I  could  get  acquainted  with  them  and  they  with  me,  we 
were  all  unacquainted  with  each  other.  I  wanted  to  show  them 
that  I  was  on  the  work.  I  had  some  money  with  me,  but  preferred 
to  work  and  keep  it  than  do  nothing  and  get  short.  I  soon  found 
all  the  work  I  wanted,  my  last  work  there  paid  me  four  dollars 
per  day. 

To  show  the  importance  of  looking  after  and  husbanding 
small  things  I  will  relate  an  item.  In  the  summer  of  1845  I  was 
boarding  with  my  father  and  teaching  a  district  school.  In  his 
corn  field  were  sharp  corners  and  crooks  in  his  fence,  leaving  a 
few  square  feet  of  land  here  and  there,  which  he  could  not  culti- 
vate with  his  teams  and  consented  that  myself  and  brother  could 
dig  it  up  and  plant  potatoes  in  it  for  ourselves,  which  work  we 
did  mornings  and  evenings  so  as  not  to  trench  upon  our  daily 
duties.  Little  did  we  think  that  seven  years  from  that  time  we 
would  have  raised  and  sold  for  gold  coin  one  million  dollars' 
worth  of  potatoes  in  a  strange  country  three  thousand  miles 
away.  We  did  not  anticipate  much  of  an  income  from  what  we 
were  then  doing;  but  it  was  exercise  and  a  lesson  for  us,  as  it 
was  the  first  time  we  had  ever  attempted  to  produce  wealth  from 
the  elements,  working  under  our  own  dictation.  Producing 
wealth  from  the  elements  has  been  our  occupation  since,  and 
several  millions  besides  the  one  referred  to  above  has  been  pro- 
duced under  our  superintendence.  150  men  was  about  the  ex- 
treme number  employed  by  us  at  any  one  time  in  California,  here 
the  average  has  been  nearly  double  that  number.  The  point  I 
wish  to  make  is,  we  raised  some  potatoes,  dug  and  buried  them 
to  protect  them  from  the  winter's  frost.  They  were  yet  under 
the  frozen  ground  in  January,  when  I  was  ready  to  start  for 
California,  I  sold  my  share  of  them  for  five  dollars.  When  I 
got  to  New  York  I  added  two  dollars  to  the  five  and  bought  a 
Colt's  six  shooter  pistol.  I  was  told  "you  are  going  to  a  country 
occupied  by  savage  beasts,  and  still  more  savage  men,  and  you 
must  go  armed  to  protect  yourself." 

When  I  got  to  California  it  was  in  the  throes  of  a  revolution, 
a  war  was  raging  between  the  United  States  and  Mexico.  I 
carried  my  rifle  and  pistol  wherever  I  went  prospecting,  but 
seeing  no  one  I  wanted  to  shoot  and  no  one  wanting  to  shoot 


275 

me,  I  concluded  my  pistol  was  useless  and  traded  it  to  a  Spaniard 
for  a  yoke  of  oxen,  (the  first  animals  I  ever  owned)  and  with  them 
I  plowed  for  and  planted  my  first  crop  of  vegetables  in  California. 
From  this  small  beginning  grew  the  large  business  referred  to. 

Five  dollars'  worth  of  potatoes  in  New  Jersey  was  a  small 
capital  for  starting  a  large  farming  business  in  California,  but  it 
had  its  effect  in  helping  me  to  a  yoke  of  oxen.  If  I  had  idled 
away  my  mornings  and  evenings  I  would  have  had  no  potatoes; 
no  potatoes,  no  five  dollars;  no  five  dollars,  no  pistol;  no  pistol, 
no  oxen;  no  oxen,  no  plowing  and  experimenting  in  1847  and  '48, 
and  perhaps  the  foundation  would  never  have  been  laid  for  the 
large  business  I  afterwards  built  up.  A  young  man  starting 
out  to  hew  for  himself  a  character  and  a  fortune  without  assist- 
ance must  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things,  for  small 
renumeration  he  must  be  willing  to  accept,  or  even  no  remuner- 
ation at  all  until  better  opportunities  present  themselves;  he 
should  be  humble  enough  to  pick  up,  earn  and  save  the  pennies. 

It  is  his  school  days,  the  doing  things  in  a  small  way  may  be 
the  means  of  qualifying  him  for  handling  a  large  business  if  it 
ever  presented  itself.  The  valuable  superintendent  is  the  one 
who  understands  and  works  up  the. details  of  the  business,  and 
if  the  details  are  neglected  success  is  uncertain.  Had  I  not  saved 
my  small  earnings  it  is  doubtful  of  my  ever  having  been  able 
to  prospect  in  the  West  or  pay  my  way  to  California,  and  after 
I  got  to  California  had  I  been  unwilling,  or  from  lack  of  the 
necessary  qualifications  unable  to  handle  the  plow  and  guide  the 
team  myself,  and  work  on  alone  under  disadvantages  and  dis- 
couragements, I  may  then  have  been  from  home  when  fortune 
knocked;  but  I  was  there  ready  \vhen  she  knocked,  took  hold 
at  her  bidding  and  went  my  way  rejoicing. 

After  my  first  success  others  followed  my  plows,  worked  my 
teams,  planted,  harvested  and  marketed  my  crops,  made  my 
irrigating  and  draining  ditches,  built  my  buildings,  fences,  etc., 
as  I  directed.  My  business  was  large,  but  I  never  employed  a 
superintendent.  I  kept  hold  of  my  business,  bossed  it  and,  in 
fact,  was  absolute  monarch.  My  first  year's  struggles  I  worked 
with  my  head  and  hands  against  great  odds;  but  it  was  the 
struggle  that  made  possible  my  after  achievements,  which  as 
elsewhere  stated,  proved  perhaps,  the  most  prosperous  farming 
venture  from  so  small  a  beginning,  in  so  short  a  time  ever  re- 


276 

corded  in  America  up  to  that  time.  It  must  be  remembered 
that  the  wealth  referred  to  above  was  all  produced  from  the 
elements,  by  subduing  the  earth  and  making  it  yield  up  its 
treasures  to  us. 

This  may  encourage  some  young  men  who  are  compelled  to 
work  their  own  way  in  the  world,  not  to  get  discouraged,  wilt 
down  and  think  themselves  paupers,  as  did  the  young  educated 
Hawaiian  referred  to  in  the  beginning  of  this  narrative. 

If  you  have  health,  strength  and  youth  at  command,  you 
are  in  possession  of  the  most  valuable  earthly  blessing  possessed 
by  man.  They  are  blessings  that  scores  of  people  would  willingly 
pay  you  a  million  dollars  for  if  you  could  deliver  the  goods.  But 
fortuately  this  kind  of  wealth  cannot  be  bought,  or  sold;  and  if 
you  properly  use  it,  every  earthly  comfort  is  within  your  reach. 
Don't  be  afraid  of  working  yourself  to  death,  "Rust  consumes 
faster  than  labor  wears."  If  hard  work  of  head  and  hands  was 
killing,  I  should  have  been  dead  at  least  twenty  years  ago,  in- 
stead of  now  being  hale  and  hearty  at  the  age  of  seventy-seven. 

Young  man  husband  your  present  wealth,  don't  destroy  or 
waste  it  by  smoking,  chewing,  drinking,  gambling  or  other 
dissipations  as  these  all  consume  your  wealth  of  time,  health 
and  strength  and  your  acquired  wealth  to  gratify  them,  when 
you  gratify  them  long  enough  you  then  may  in  truth  be  a  self 
made  pauper. 

Senator  William  Y.  Horner  who  died  in  Lahaina,  Maui, 
Hawaiian  Islands,  on  the  2ist  February,  1898,  is  the  brother 
named  all  through  this  brief  biography.  He  was  born  October 
2ist,  1827.  He  was  one  of  the  most  industrious,  level-headed, 
trusty  and  honest  men  that  has  ever  been  my  lot  to  know.  His 
word  was  as  good  as  his  bond. 

JOHN  MEIRS  HORNER. 

Kukaiau,  Hawaii,  Hawaiian  Islands,  March   12,   1898. 

